# Video Transcript

Hi, I'm Geoff Challen. I teach computer science at the University of Illinois. In this video, I'm going to show you the interactive walkthrough component that I created to support student success in CS1 and to teach computer science to thousands of students. To do this, I'm going to demo it on learncs.online. This website is the publicly available version of the same course materials that we use at the University of Illinois. But it's freely available, so you're welcome to create an account, log on, and follow along.

The format of these materials goes back to the pandemic. Like other instructors, I was challenged with the task of teaching a remote population during the pandemic, and I chose to use that as an opportunity to innovate, creating a new format for the course materials, a format that has proven so successful that we still use it today, even though the pandemic is over. We saw student success rates rise, and today about 80% of the students in my course earn A-range grades, even after a lot of rigorous testing. So how does this work? Let me walk you through the process to give some context for the interactive walkthroughs themselves.

My course does not use a lecture model of instruction. Instead, each day students complete an interactive lesson. Those lessons start with students writing hello world. We start with students that have never written a line of code before. We teach them day by day the basics of imperative programming. Then we get into some objects, baby data structures, and recursion by the end of the class. And by the time they finish, students are not only able to write more complex programs, but they're able to complete most of the implementation of a simple Android application.

Let's take a look at one of these lessons. The learncs.online lessons are similar to the ones that we use in my class, and they comprise a variety of interactive components. My goal is to make these as engaging as possible. I want students' hands to stay close to the keyboard. I don't want them to zone out or get passive. I want them to have opportunities to interact with the content throughout the lesson. So for example, every piece of code on the website can be edited and run in the browser. So I can make changes and I can experiment. That's one way that students learn. Here's another example of a playground, as we call them. And then here's our first example of an interactive walkthrough. So let me go ahead and show you how this works. I'm going to use Colleen Lewis's explanation here. I'm going to jump ahead a little bit and play it from about a minute in.

And so what you can see is that we're listening to Colleen, but we're also watching her manipulate the code. This may look a lot like a video, and that was my inspiration. But it solves one of my core frustrations with explanatory coding videos. And this is something that I realized when I started to click on them, because I was trying to experiment with the code, forgetting that that valuable code, that valuable data for instructional use had been destroyed and converted to pixels. In the interactive walkthroughs the code is preserved. So at any point a student can pause the walkthrough and they can take over and they can make the changes that they want to make. We have some check style layers that we need to fix here, for example, and they can try new things.

And so what we have is the best of a video explanation but also the ability for students to always interact with the code and keep the materials engaging. I'm going to come back and show you how to record one of these, but just let me finish looking at the rest of the lesson. So we also use video if there's things that we can't explain through code, but the interactive walkthroughs are really the workhorse and foundation of the explanatory content on the site. Here's another one. This one's about four minutes. Here's a longer one. It's about eight minutes. We try to keep these to about five minutes long, and we try to really focus them on a single topic. Towards the end of the lesson or throughout we also have a lot of different assessment type components. That's not my focus right now, but we have code writing challenges like this one, we have debugging challenges where students have broken code that they need to fix, and then we also have a new test writing challenge where students are challenged to write tests for an existing problem and we evaluate how accurate their tests are. That's pretty exciting.

So let's go back to the interactive walkthroughs and I want to show you how these are created. To do that, I'm going to log in with an instructor account. And now you'll be able to see that there's this record button here. And the recording of interactive walkthroughs is done entirely in situ. It's done in the context of the page and the rest of the materials. So you can see, I can see what led into it. I can see what follows it. I can see the whole context of this walkthrough to help understand what is its purpose, and what role is it playing within the context of the lesson. When I'm ready to create my own explanation, I can hit the record button and then I just start talking and typing. If I want to run the code, I can do that. We also have a version of this that's connected with our homework autograder, so we can record solution explanations as well. And off I go. So I can make changes. I can show students how to do things with the code. And in general, I talk and I type until I'm finished with my explanation. At that point, I'm going to go over here and stop the recording. If I want to run their code, I can do that. And you can hear now that I'm previewing my explanation, which is a default setting so that we make sure that we review stuff before we upload it. If I'm happy with it, I hit the upload button and it appears on the site immediately.

I wanted this to be as seamless as possible for a couple of reasons. First, for me, obviously, so it's easy for me to make changes to the materials and add explanations. But part of my goal with these was to create a community of instructors and to make it easier for my staff to contribute to the course materials. And here's an example. So you'll see there's an explanation from me. There is one from Colleen Lewis, who's a colleague of mine at the University of Illinois, who was a co-instructor for the course in 2021, and there are two course staff members who have also recorded their own explanations. This is very easy to do, as I just said, and what this does is it diversifies the voice with which the course speaks.

I'm a white, straight, cisgender frisbee-playing computer scientist. So I know that I check a lot of stereotype boxes when it comes to what students might think a computer scientist is quote-unquote supposed to look like. And so I'm very conscious of that. I teach a diverse population of students, and I want to make sure that they can see themselves succeeding in computer science. And I think I worry sometimes that too much of watching or listening to people with certain identity attributes ends up making people think maybe that they aren't going to be able to succeed. So I wanted a way to invite other voices into the course to make it possible for many different people to contribute to the course materials. That's what's happened. We now have contributions from hundreds of course staff members, four instructors, two of them at external institutions now, and then hundreds and hundreds of current and former staff members. Many of them have made a small number of contributions, which is fine. That's one of the nice things about this. You don't have to rerecord a whole big chunk of content. You can just find one explanation that maybe you like or maybe you don't like the existing explanations and you think you can improve on. Spend a few minutes coming up with a plan, record it, and you're done. And so over time, we've amassed a large corpus of these. As you can see here, we've got over 3,000 explanations from over 300 instructors, totaling about 201 hours of live coding walkthroughs.

We use these. These generate data as they run about what students are watching, and we use that data in a couple of ways. In my class, we create accountability by linking completion of the walkthroughs to student performance. So this is the grades page that my students have access to where they can see how they're doing in the class. And on this, for each lesson, we also have information about walkthrough completion. This student watched most of the walkthroughs. They also did very well in the course. But when students are not doing well, frequently we can use this data to be able to help them understand, hey, if you want to succeed in the class, one thing you might want to try is paying more attention to the materials and spending more time there.

We've also used this data to do studies about student behavior. So this was published at SIGCSE last year. It's joint work with Luc Paquette, a colleague of mine at the School of Education and his student Rachel Zhao, where we use this data to look at how students develop preferences when there are multiple instructors who are both involved with the same course. I will refer you to the details in the paper, but there were some quite interesting insights that came out of this analysis.

So what next? Where do we go from here? I would love to bring this innovation, this specific innovation, but also my deep interest in technological innovation to support education to the University of Sydney. And I think that this type of technology would be able to support students in a wide variety of courses. I think there's opportunities to expand this outside of just introductory computer science to different types of textual-based explanation. And of course there are so many exciting new opportunities with AI as it transforms computer science and education. Could we use AI to generate custom walkthroughs for students who are struggling based on their knowledge gaps? We identify a knowledge gap using an assessment, then we generate a custom walkthrough to target the very things that the student is having a hard time understanding, and of course the AI can generate multiple of these if needed. So I would be incredibly excited to bring not only this specific technology but my continued interest in technological innovation to support the University of Sydney.
